Knn docs (#2769)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/yql/reference/yql-core/udf/list/knn.md

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# KNN
## Introduction
```

> [Nearest Neighbor search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nearest_neighbor_search) (NN) is an optimization task that consists in finding the closest point (or set of points) in a given dataset to a given query point. Closeness can be defined in terms of distance or similarity metrics.
> A generalization of the NN problem is the k-NN problem, where it's required to find the k nearest points to the query point. This can be useful in various applications such as image classification, recommendation systems, and more.
> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nearest_neighbor_search

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Nearest Neighbor search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nearest_neighbor_search) (NN) is an optimization task that consists of finding the closest point in a given dataset to a given query point. Closeness can be defined in terms of distance or similarity metrics.
A generalization of the NN problem is the [k-NN problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-nearest_neighbors_algorithm), where it's required to find the `k` nearest points to the query point. This can be useful in various applications such as image classification, recommendation systems, etc.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nearest_neighbor_search
```

> The solution of the problem is divided into two major subclasses of methods: exact and approximate. In this document, we will talk about the exact brute force method.
> 
> The method is based on calculating the distance from the query point to every other point in the database. This algorithm, also known as the naive approach, has a complexity of `O(dn)`, where `n` is the number of points in the dataset, and `d` is its dimension.
> 
> The advantage of the method is that there is no need for additional data structures, such as specialized vector indexes.
> The disadvantage is the need for a complete data search. But this disadvantage is insignificant in cases where data has been pre-filtered, for example, by user ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The k-NN problem solution is divided into two major subclasses of methods: exact and approximate. In this document, we will talk about the exact brute force method.

This method is based on calculating the distance from the query point to every other point in the database. This algorithm, also known as the naive approach, has a complexity of `O(dn)`, where `n` is the number of points in the dataset, and `d` is its dimension.

The advantage of the method is that there is no need for additional data structures, such as specialized vector indexes.
The disadvantage is the need for a complete data search. But this disadvantage is insignificant in cases where data has been pre-filtered, for example, by user ID.
```

Example:

```sql

> SELECT id, fact, embedding FROM Facts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DECLARE $TargetEmbedding AS List<Float>;
SELECT id, fact, embedding FROM Facts
```

Reviewer: Otherwise, the query won't be valid.

Author: eb58508fbc525ff955239f046a5c120537268724

WHERE user="Williams"

> ORDER BY Knn::CosineDistance(Knn::FromBinaryString(embedding), $TargetEmbedding)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ORDER BY Knn::CosineDistance(
    Knn::FromBinaryString(embedding),
    $TargetEmbedding
)
```

LIMIT 10
```

> ## Data type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Data types
```

In mathematics, a vector of real numbers is used to store points.

> In YDB, for calculations the `List<Float>` data type is used, and data will be stored in the string data type `String`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In {{ ydb-short-name }}, for calculations the `List<Float>` data type is used, and data will be stored in the `String` data type.
```

## Functions

Vector functions are implemented as user-defined functions (UDF) in the `Knn` module.

### Distance and similarity functions

> The distance and similarity functions take two lists of real numbers as input and return the distance/similarity between them.
> Distance functions return small values for close vectors, similarity functions return large values for close vectors. This should be taken into account in the sorting order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distance and similarity functions take two lists of real numbers as input and return the distance/similarity between them.

{% note info %}

Distance functions return small values for close vectors, while similarity functions return large values for close vectors. This should be taken into account when defining the sorting order.

{% endnote %}
```

> Similarity functions:
> * inner product `InnerProductSimilarity' (sum of products of coordinates)
> * cosine similarity `CosineSimilarity' (inner product / vector lengths)
> 
> Distance functions:
> * euclidean distance `EuclideanDistance' (the root of the sum of squares of coordinate differences)
> * cosine distance `CosineDistance' (1 - cosine similarity)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarity functions:
* inner product `InnerProductSimilarity` (sum of products of coordinates)
* cosine similarity `CosineSimilarity` (inner product / vector lengths)

Distance functions:
* euclidean distance `EuclideanDistance` (the root of the sum of squares of coordinate differences)
* cosine distance `CosineDistance` (1 - cosine similarity)
```

> #### Function signature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Function signatures
```

```sql

> Knn::InnerProductSimilarity(List<Float>?, List<Float>?)->Float?
> Knn::CosineSimilarity(List<Float>?, List<Float>?)->Float?
> Knn::EuclideanDistance(List<Float>?, List<Float>?)->Float?
> Knn::CosineDistance(List<Float>?, List<Float>?)->Float?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Knn::InnerProductSimilarity(List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap}, List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::CosineSimilarity(List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap}, List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::EuclideanDistance(List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap}, List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::CosineDistance(List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap}, List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
```
as far as I can tell that's what it ended up being in #2519, but please double-check

```

> In case of error, the functions return NULL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of an error, these functions return `NULL`.
```

> ### Functions for converting a vector to a binary representation
> 
> Conversion functions are needed to serialize the vector set into an internal binary representation and vice versa.
> The binary representation of the vector will be stored in the YDB database in the `String` type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Functions for converting between vector and binary representations

Conversion functions are needed to serialize the vector set into an internal binary representation and vice versa.
The binary representation of a vector can be persisted in a {{ ydb-short-name }}  table column of the `String` type.
```

#### Function signature

```sql
Knn::ToBinaryString(List<Float>)->String

> Knn::FromBinaryString(String)->List<Float>?

Reviewer: I think FromBinaryString could use TAutoMap too, you might consider updating https://github.com/azevaykin/ydb/blob/f21ee1198d8ff0def282b9feba6f0abcc77d9e06/ydb/library/yql/udfs/common/knn/knn.cpp#L20

Author: https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/2795

> #### Function signature
> 
> ```sql
> Knn::ToBinaryString(List<Float>)->String
> Knn::FromBinaryString(String)->List<Float>?
> ```
> 
> In case of deserialization error, the `FromBinaryString` function return NULL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Function signatures

```sql
Knn::ToBinaryString(List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap})->String
Knn::FromBinaryString(String)->List<Float>?
```

In case of a deserialization error, the `FromBinaryString` function returns `NULL`.
```

## Examples

### Creating a table

```sql
CREATE TABLE Facts (
    id Uint64,        // Id of fact
    user String,      // User name

>     fact String,      // Human readable description of user fact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    fact String,      // Human-readable description of a user fact
```

>     embedding String, // Binary representation of embedding vector (result of Knn::ToBinaryString)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    embedding String, // Binary representation of embedding vector (a result of Knn::ToBinaryString)
```

    PRIMARY KEY (id)
)
```

### Adding vectors

```sql
UPSERT INTO Facts (id, user, fact, embedding) 
VALUES (123, "Williams", "Full name is John Williams", Knn::ToBinaryString([1.0f, 2.0f, 3.0f, 4.0f]))
```

### Exact vector search

```sql
$TargetEmbedding = [1.2f, 2.3f, 3.4f, 4.5f]

SELECT * FROM Facts
WHERE user="Williams"

> ORDER BY Knn::CosineDistance(Knn::FromBinaryString(embedding), $TargetEmbedding)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ORDER BY Knn::CosineDistance(
    Knn::FromBinaryString(embedding),
    $TargetEmbedding
)
```
